PREFACE.


It has become a universal custom to obtain and preserve the likenesses
of one's friends. Photographs are the most popular form of these
likenesses, as they give the true exterior outlines and appearance,
(except coloring) of the subjects. But how much more popular and useful
does photography become, when it can be used as a means of securing
plates from which to print photographs in a regular printing press, and,
what is more astonishing and delightful, to produce the REAL COLORS of
nature as shown in the subject, no matter how brilliant or varied.

We quote from the December number of the Ladies' Home Journal: "_An
excellent_ suggestion was recently made by the Department of Agriculture
at Washington that the public schools of the country shall have a new
holiday, to be known as Bird Day. Three cities have already adopted the
suggestion, and it is likely that others will quickly follow. Of course,
Bird Day will differ from its successful predecessor, Arbor Day. We can
plant trees but not birds. It is suggested that Bird Day take the form
of bird exhibitions, of bird exercises, of bird studies--any form of
entertainment, in fact, which will bring children closer to their little
brethren of the air, and in more intelligent sympathy with their life
and ways. There is a wonderful story in bird life, and but few of our
children know it. Few of our elders do, for that matter. A whole day of
a year can well and profitably be given over to the birds. Than such
study, nothing can be more interesting. The cultivation of an intimate
acquaintanceship with our feathered friends is a source of genuine
pleasure. We are under greater obligations to the birds than we dream
of. Without them the world would be more barren than we imagine.
Consequently, we have some duties which we owe them. What these duties
are only a few of us know or have ever taken the trouble to find out.
Our children should not be allowed to grow to maturity without this
knowledge. The more they know of the birds the better men and women they
will be. We can hardly encourage such studies too much."

Of all animated nature, birds are the most beautiful in coloring, most
graceful in form and action, swiftest in motion and most perfect emblems
of freedom.

They are withal, very intelligent and have many remarkable traits, so
that their habits and characteristics make a delightful study for all
lovers of nature. In view of the facts, we feel that we are doing a
useful work for the young, and one that will be appreciated by
progressive parents, in placing within the easy possession of children
in the homes these beautiful photographs of birds.

The text is prepared with the view of giving the children as clear an
idea as possible, of haunts, habits, characteristics and such other
information as will lead them to love the birds and delight in their
study and acquaintance.

                                             NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING


       *       *       *       *       *




                                  #BIRDS.#

                      ILLUSTRATED BY COLOR PHOTOGRAPHY.

 ======================================================================
  VOL. 1.                        MAY, 1897.                     No. 5.
 ======================================================================


NESTING TIME.

    "There swims no goose so gray, but soon or late,
     She takes some honest gander for a mate;"
     There live no birds, however bright or plain,
     But rear a brood to take their place again.
                                              --C. C. M.


Quite the jolliest season of the year, with the birds, is when they
begin to require a home, either as a shelter from the weather, a defence
against their enemies, or a place to rear and protect their young. May
is not the only month in which they build their nests, some of our
favorites, indeed, waiting till June, and even July; but as it is the
time of the year when a general awakening to life and activity is felt
in all nature, and the early migrants have come back, not to re-visit,
but to re-establish their temporarily deserted homes, we naturally fix
upon the first real spring month as the one in which their little hearts
are filled with titillations of joy and anticipation.

In May, when the trees have put on their fullest dress of green, and the
little nests are hidden from all curious eyes, if we could look quite
through the waving branches and rustling leaves, we should behold the
little mothers sitting upon their tiny eggs in patient happiness, or
feeding their young broods, not yet able to flutter away; while in the
leafy month of June, when Nature is perfect in mature beauty, the young
may everywhere be seen gracefully imitating the parent birds, whose sole
purpose in life seems to be the fulfillment of the admonition to care
well for one's own.

There can hardly be a higher pleasure than to watch the nest-building of
birds. See the Wren looking for a convenient cavity in ivy-covered
walls, under eaves, or among the thickly growing branches of fir trees,
the tiny creature singing with cheerful voice all day long. Observe the
Woodpecker tunneling his nest in the limb of a lofty tree, his
pickax-like beak finding no difficulty in making its way through the
decayed wood, the sound of his pounding, however, accompanied by his
shrill whistle, echoing through the grove.

But the nest of the Jay: Who can find it? Although a constant prowler
about the nests of other birds, he is so wary and secretive that his
little home is usually found only by accident. And the Swallow: "He is
the bird of return," Michelet prettily says of him. If you will only
treat him kindly, says Ruskin, year after year, he comes back to the
same niche, and to the same hearth, for his nest. To the same niche!
Think of this a little, as if you heard of it for the first time.

But nesting-time with the birds is one of sentiment as well as of
industry The amount of affectation in lovemaking they are capable of is
simply ludicrous. The British Sparrow which, like the poor, we have with
us always, is a much more interesting bird in this and other respects
than we commonly give him credit for. It is because we see him every
day, at the back door, under the eaves, in the street, in the parks,
that we are indifferent to him. Were he of brighter plumage, brilliant
as the Bobolink or the Oriole, he would be a welcome, though a
perpetual, guest, and we would not, perhaps, seek legislative action for
his extermination. If he did not drive away Bluebirds, whose
nesting-time and nesting-place are quite the same as his own, we might
not discourage his nesting proclivity, although we cannot help
recognizing his cheerful chirp with generous crumbs when the snow has
covered all the earth and left him desolate.

                                              C. C. MARBLE.




NATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN.

  EXTRACT FROM THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DRESS, BY ITS CHAIRMAN,
                          MRS. FRANK JOHNSON.


BIRDS, WINGS AND FEATHERS EMPLOYED AS GARNITURE.

From the school-room there should certainly emanate a sentiment which
would discourage forever the slaughter of birds for ornament.

The use of birds and their plumage is as inartistic as it is cruel and
barbarous.


THE HALO.

"One London dealer in birds received, when the fashion was at its
height, a single consignment of thirty-two thousand dead humming birds,
and another received at one time, thirty thousand aquatic birds and
three hundred thousand pairs of wings."

       Think what a price to pay,
       Faces so bright and gay,
          Just for a hat!
    Flowers unvisited, mornings unsung,
    Sea-ranges bare of the wings that o'erswung--
          Bared just for that!

       Think of the others, too,
       Others and _mothers_, too,
          Bright-Eyes in hat!
    Hear you no mother-groan floating in air,
    Hear you no little moan--birdling's despair--
          Somewhere for that?

       Caught 'mid some mother-work,
       Torn by a hunter Turk,
          Just for your hat!
    Plenty of mother-heart yet in the world:
    All the more wings to tear, carefully twirled!
         _Women want_ that?

       Oh, but the shame of it,
       Oh, but the blame of it,
          Price of a hat!
    Just for a jauntiness brightening the street!
    This is your halo--O faces so sweet--
         _Death_, and for that!--W. C. GANNETT.


       *       *       *       *       *




 [Illustration: From col. Chi. Acad. Sciences.
                SCREECH OWL.]

THE MOTTLED OR "SCREECH" OWL.


"Night wanderer," as this species of Owl has been appropriately called,
appears to be peculiar to America. They are quite scarce in the south,
but above the Falls of the Ohio they increase in number, and are
numerous in Virginia, Maryland, and all the eastern districts. Its
flight, like that of all the owl family, is smooth and noiseless. He may
be sometimes seen above the topmost branches of the highest trees in
pursuit of large beetles, and at other times he sails low and swiftly
over the fields or through the woods, in search of small birds, field
mice, moles, or wood rats, on which he chiefly subsists.

The Screech Owl's nest is built in the bottom of a hollow trunk of a
tree, from six to forty feet from the ground. A few grasses and feathers
are put together and four or five eggs are laid, of nearly globular form
and pure white color. This species is a native of the northern regions,
arriving here about the beginning of cold weather and frequenting the
uplands and mountain districts in preference to the lower parts of the
country.

In the daytime the Screech Owl sits with his eyelids half closed, or
slowly and alternately opening and shutting, as if suffering from the
glare of day; but no sooner is the sun set than his whole appearance
changes; he becomes lively and animated, his full and globular eyes
shine like those of a cat, and he often lowers his head like a cock when
preparing to fight, moving it from side to side, and also vertically, as
if watching you sharply. In flying, it shifts from place to place "with
the silence of a spirit," the plumage of its wings being so extremely
fine and soft as to occasion little or no vibration of the air.

The Owl swallows its food hastily, in large mouthfuls. When the retreat
of a Screech Owl, generally a hollow tree or an evergreen in a retired
situation, is discovered by the Blue Jay and some other birds, an alarm
is instantly raised, and the feathered neighbors soon collect and by
insults and noisy demonstration compel his owlship to seek a lodging
elsewhere. It is surmised that this may account for the circumstance of
sometimes finding them abroad during the day on fences and other exposed
places.

Both red and gray young are often found in the same nest, while the
parents may be both red or both gray, the male red and the female gray,
or vice versa.

The vast numbers of mice, beetles, and vermin which they destroy render
the owl a public benefactor, much as he has been spoken against for
gratifying his appetite for small birds. It would be as reasonable to
criticise men for indulging in the finer foods provided for us by the
Creator. They have been everywhere hunted down without mercy or justice.

During the night the Screech Owl utters a very peculiar wailing cry, not
unlike the whining of a puppy, intermingled with gutteral notes. The
doleful sounds are in great contrast with the lively and excited air of
the bird as he utters them. The hooting sound, so fruitful of "shudders"
in childhood, haunts the memory of many an adult whose earlier years,
like those of the writer, were passed amidst rural scenery.




THE SCREECH OWL.


I wouldn't let them put my picture last in the book as they did my
cousin's picture in March "BIRDS." I told them I would screech if they
did.

You don't see me as often as you do the Blue-bird, Robin, Thrush and
most other birds, but it is because you don't look for me. Like all
other owls I keep quiet during the day, but when night comes on, then my
day begins. I would just as soon do as the other birds--be busy during
the day and sleep during the night--but really I can't. The sun is too
bright for my eyes and at night I can see very well. You must have your
folks tell you why this is.

I like to make my nest in a hollow orchard tree, or in a thick
evergreen. Sometimes I make it in a hay loft. Boys and girls who live in
the country know what a hay loft is.

People who know me like to have me around, for I catch a good many mice,
and rats that kill small chickens. All night long I fly about so quietly
that you could not hear me. I search woods, fields, meadows, orchards,
and even around houses and barns to get food for my baby owls and their
mamma. Baby owls are queer children. They never get enough to eat, it
seems. They are quiet all day, but just as soon as the sun sets and
twilight gathers, you should see what a wide awake family a nest full of
hungry little screech owls can be.

Did you ever hear your mamma say when she couldn't get baby to sleep at
night, that he is like a little owl? You know now what she means. I
think I hear my little folks calling for me so I'll be off. Good night
to you, and good morning for me.




 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                ORCHARD ORIOLE.
                4/5 Life-size.]

THE ORCHARD ORIOLE.

    The Orchard Oriole is here.
    Why has he come? To cheer, to cheer--C. C. M.


The Orchard Oriole has a general range throughout the United States,
spending the winter in Central America. It breeds only in the eastern
and central parts of the United States. In Florida it is a summer
resident, and is found in greatest abundance in the states bordering the
Mississippi Valley. This Oriole appears on our southern border about the
first of April, moving leisurely northward to its breeding grounds for a
month or six weeks, according to the season, the males preceding the
females several days.

Though a fine bird, and attractive in his manners and attire, he is not
so interesting or brilliant as his cousin, the Baltimore Oriole. He is
restless and impulsive, but of a pleasant disposition, on good terms
with his neighbors, and somewhat shy and difficult to observe closely,
as he conceals himself in the densest foliage while at rest, or flies
quickly about from twig to twig in search of insects, which, during the
summer months, are his exclusive diet.

The favorite haunts of this very agreeable songster, as his name
implies, are orchards, and when the apple and pear trees are in bloom,
and the trees begin to put out their leaves, his notes have an ecstatic
character quite the reverse of the mournful lament of the Baltimore
species. Some writers speak of his song as confused, but others say this
attribute does not apply to his tones, the musician detecting anything
but confusion in the rapidity and distinctness of his gushing notes.
These may be too quick for the listener to follow, but there is harmony
in them.

In the Central States hardly an orchard or a garden of any size can be
found without these birds. They prefer to build their nests in apple
trees. The nest is different, but quite as curiously made as that of the
Baltimore. It is suspended from a small twig, often at the very
extremity of the branches. The outer part of the nest is usually formed
of long, tough grass, woven through with as much neatness and in as
intricate a manner as if sewed with a needle. The nests are round, open
at the top, about four inches broad and three deep.

It is admitted that few birds do more good and less harm than our
Orchard Oriole, especially to the fruit grower. Most of his food
consists of small beetles, plant lice, flies, hairless caterpillars,
cabbage worms, grasshoppers, rose bugs, and larvÊ of all kinds, while
the few berries it may help itself to during the short time they last
are many times paid for by the great number of insect pests destroyed,
making it worthy the fullest protection.

The Orchard Oriole is very social, especially with the king bird. Most
of his time is spent in trees. His flight is easy, swift, and graceful.
The female lays from four to six eggs, one each day. She alone sits on
the eggs, the male feeding her at intervals. Both parents are devoted to
their young.

The fall migration begins in the latter part of July or the beginning of
August, comparatively few remaining till September.




THE MARSH HAWK.


One of the most widely distributed birds of North America is the Marsh
Hawk, according to Wilson, breeding from the fur regions around Hudson's
Bay to Texas, and from Nova Scotia to Oregon and California. Excepting
in the Southern portion of the United States, it is abundant everywhere.
It makes its appearance in the fur countries about the opening of the
rivers, and leaves about the beginning of November. Small birds, mice,
fish, worms, and even snakes, constitute its food, without much
discrimination. It is very expert in catching small green lizards,
animals that can easily evade the quickest vision.

It is very slow on the wing, flies very low, and in a manner different
from all others of the hawk family. Flying near the surface of the
water, just above the weeds and canes, the Marsh Hawk rounds its
untiring circles hour after hour, darting after small birds as they rise
from cover. Their never ending flight, graceful as it is, becomes
monotonous to the watcher. Pressed by hunger, they attack even wild
ducks.

In New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware, where it sweeps over the low
lands, sailing near the earth, in search of a kind of mouse very common
in such situations, it is chiefly known as the Mouse Hawk. In the
southern rice fields it is useful in preventing to some extent the
ravages of the swarms of Bobolinks. It has been stated that one Marsh
Hawk was considered by planters equal to several negroes for alarming
the rice birds. This Hawk when feeding is readily approached.

The birds nest in low lands near the sea shore, in the barrens, and on
the clear table-lands of the Alleghanies, and once a nest was found in a
high covered pine barrens of Florida.

The Marsh Hawks always keep together after pairing, working jointly in
building the nest, in sitting upon the eggs, and in feeding the young.
The nest is clumsily made of hay, occasionally lined with feathers, pine
needles, and small twigs. It is built on the ground, and contains from
three to five eggs of a bluish white color, usually more or less marked
with purplish brown blotches. Early May is their breeding time.

It will be observed that even the Hawk, rapacious as he undoubtedly is,
is a useful bird. Sent for the purpose of keeping the small birds in
bounds, he performs his task well, though it may seem to man harsh and
tyranical. The Marsh Hawk is an ornament to our rural scenery, and a
pleasing sight as he darts silently past in the shadows of falling
night.

 [Illustration: From col. Chi. Acad. Sciences.
                MARSH HAWK.]




CHICKADEE.

Bird of the Merry Heart.


Here is a picture of a bird that is always merry. He is a bold, saucy
little fellow, too, but we all love him for it. Don't you think he looks
some like the Canada Jay that you saw in April "BIRDS?"

I think most of you must have seen him, for he stays with us all the
year, summer and winter. If you ever heard him, you surely noticed how
plainly he tells you his name. Listen--"Chick-a-dee-dee; Chick-a-dee;
Hear, hear me"--That's what he says as he hops about from twig to twig
in search of insects' eggs and other bits for food. No matter how bitter
the wind or how deep the snow, he is always around--the same jolly,
careless little fellow, chirping and twittering his notes of good
cheer.

Like the Yellow Warblers on page 169, Chickadees like best to make their
home in an old stump or hole in a tree--not very high from the ground.
Sometimes they dig for themselves a new hole, but this is only when they
cannot find one that suits them.

The Chickadee is also called Black-capped Titmouse. If you look at his
picture you will see his black cap. You'll have to ask someone why he is
called Titmouse. I think Chickadee is the prettier name, don't you?

If you want to get well acquainted with this saucy little bird, you want
to watch for him next winter, when most of the birds have gone south.
Throw him crumbs of bread and he will soon be so tame as to come right
up to the door step.




THE SCISSOR-TAILED FLYCATCHER.


Flycatchers are all interesting, and many of them are beautiful, but the
Scissor-tailed species of Texas is especially attractive. They are also
known as the Swallow-tailed Flycatcher, and more frequently as the
"Texan Bird of Paradise." It is a common summer resident throughout the
greater portion of that state and the Indian Territory, and its breeding
range extends northward into Southern Kansas. Occasionally it is found
in southwestern Missouri, western Arkansas, and Illinois. It is
accidental in the New England states, the Northwest Territory, and
Canada. It arrives about the middle of March and returns to its winter
home in Central America in October. Some of the birds remain in the
vicinity of Galveston throughout the year, moving about in small flocks.

There is no denying that the gracefulness of the Scissor-tailed
Flycatcher should well entitle him to the admiration of bird-lovers, and
he is certain to be noticed wherever he goes. The long outer tail
feathers he can open and close at will. His appearance is most pleasing
to the eye when fluttering slowly from tree to tree on the rather open
prairie, uttering his twittering notes, "Spee-spee." When chasing each
other in play or anger these birds have a harsh note like "Thish-thish,"
not altogether agreeable. Extensive timber land is shunned by this
Flycatcher, as it prefers more open country, though it is often seen in
the edges of woods. It is not often seen on the ground, where its
movements are rather awkward. Its amiability and social disposition are
observed in the fact that several pairs will breed close to each other
in perfect harmony. Birds smaller than itself are rarely molested by
it, but it boldly attacks birds of prey. It is a restless bird,
constantly on the lookout for passing insects, nearly all of which are
caught on the wing and carried to a perch to be eaten. It eats moths,
butterflies, beetles, grasshoppers, locusts, cotton worms, and, to some
extent, berries. Its usefulness cannot be doubted. According to Major
Bendire, these charming creatures seem to be steadily increasing in
numbers, being far more common in many parts of Texas, where they are a
matter of pride with the people, than they were twenty years ago.

The Scissor-tails begin housekeeping some time after their arrival from
Central America, courting and love making occupying much time before the
nest is built. They are not hard to please in the selection of a
suitable nesting place, almost any tree standing alone being selected
rather than a secluded situation. The nest is bulky, commonly resting on
an exposed limb, and is made of any material that may be at hand. They
nest in oaks, mesquite, honey locust, mulberry, pecan, and magnolia
trees, as well as in small thorny shrubs, from five to forty feet from
the ground. Rarely molested they become quite tame. Two broods are often
raised. The eggs are usually five. They are hatched by the female in
twelve days, while the male protects the nest from suspicious intruders.
The young are fed entirely on insects and are able to leave the nest in
two weeks. The eggs are clear white, with markings of brown, purple, and
lavender spots and blotches.

 [Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
                SCISSOR-TAILED FLYCATCHER.]




THE BLACK-CAPPED CHICKADEE.

    "Chic-chickadee dee!" I saucily say;
    My heart it is sound, my throat it is gay!
    Every one that I meet I merrily greet
    With a chickadee dee, chickadee dee!
    To cheer and to cherish, on roadside and street,
    My cap was made jaunty, my note was made sweet.

        Chickadeedee, Chickadeedee!
        No bird of the winter so merry and free;
        Yet sad is my heart, though my song one of glee,
        For my mate ne'er shall hear my chickadeedee.

    I "chickadeedee" in forest and glade,
    "Day, day, day!" to the sweet country maid;
    From autumn to spring time I utter my song
    Of chickadeedee all the day long!
    The silence of winter my note breaks in twain,
    And I "chickadeedee" in sunshine and rain.

        Chickadeedee Chickadeedee!
        No bird of the winter so merry and free;
        Yet sad is my heart, though my song one of glee,
        For my mate ne'er shall hear my chickadeedee.--C. C. M.


A saucy little bird, so active and familiar, the Black-Capped Chickadee,
is also recognized as the Black Capped Titmouse, Eastern Chickadee, and
Northern Chickadee. He is found in the southern half of the eastern
United States, north to or beyond forty degrees, west to eastern Texas
and Indian Territory.

The favorite resorts of the Chickadee are timbered districts, especially
in the bottom lands, and where there are red bud trees, in the soft wood
of which it excavates with ease a hollow for its nest. It is often wise
enough, however, to select a cavity already made, as the deserted hole
of the Downy Woodpecker, a knot hole, or a hollow fence rail. In the
winter season it is very familiar, and is seen about door yards and
orchards, even in towns, gleaning its food from the kitchen remnants,
where the table cloth is shaken, and wherever it may chance to find a
kindly hospitality.

In an article on "Birds as Protectors of Orchards," Mr. E. H. Forbush
says of the Chickadee: "There is no bird that compares with it in
destroying the female canker-worm moths and their eggs." He calculated
that one Chickadee in one day would destroy 5,550 eggs, and in the
twenty-five days in which the canker-worm moths run or crawl up the
trees 138,750 eggs. Mr. Forbush attracted Chickadees to one orchard by
feeding them in winter, and he says that in the following summer it was
noticed that while trees in neighboring orchards were seriously damaged
by canker-worms, and to a less degree by tent caterpillars, those in the
orchard which had been frequented by the Chickadee during the winter and
spring were not seriously infested, and that comparatively few of the
worms and caterpillars were to be found there. His conclusion is that
birds that eat eggs of insects are of the greatest value to the farmer,
as they feed almost entirely on injurious insects and their eggs, and
are present all winter, where other birds are absent.

The tiny nest of the Chickadee is made of all sorts of soft materials,
such as wool, fur, feathers, and hair placed in holes in stumps of
trees. Six to eight eggs are laid, which are white, thickly sprinkled
with warm brown.

Mrs. Osgood Wright tells a pretty incident of the Chickadees, thus: "In
the winter of 1891-2, when the cold was severe, the snow deep, and the
tree trunks often covered with ice, the Chickadees repaired in flocks
daily to the kennel of our old dog Colin and fed from his dish, hopping
over his back and calling Chickadee, dee, dee, in his face, a proceeding
that he never in the least resented, but seemed rather to enjoy it."




PROTHONOTARY YELLOW WARBLERS.


Quite a long name for such small birds--don't you think so? You will
have to get your teacher to repeat it several times, I fear, before you
learn it.

These little yellow warblers are just as happy as the pair of wrens I
showed you in April "BIRDS." In fact, I suspect they are even happier,
for their nest has been made and the eggs laid. What do you think of
their house? Sometimes they find an old hole in a stump, one that a
woodpecker has left, perhaps, and there build a nest. This year they
have found a very pretty place to begin their housekeeping. What kind of
tree is it? I thought I would show only the part of the tree that makes
their home. I just believe some boy or girl who loves birds made those
holes for them. Don't you think so? They have an upstairs and a down
stairs, it seems.

Like the Wrens I wrote about last month, they prefer to live in swampy
land and along rivers. They nearly always find a hole in a decayed
willow tree for their nest--low down. This isn't a willow tree, though.

Whenever I show you a pair of birds, always pick out the father and the
mother bird. You will usually find that one has more color than the
other. Which one is it? Maybe you know why this is. If you don't I am
sure your teacher can tell you. Don't you remember in the Bobolink
family how differently Mr. and Mrs. Bobolink were dressed?

I think most of you will agree with me when I say this is one of the
prettiest pictures you ever saw.
